This is Understanding Layout and
Gestures in Safari on iOS and Lion.
I'm Beth Dakin,
and I'm an engineer on the
Safari and WebKit team.
The devices on which we
browse the web have evolved.
iPads and iPhones go everywhere with us.
We use them on extremely fast networks
and on extremely slow networks.
And when we use them,
we don't even interact
with them with a mouse.
These facts affect all
of us as developers.
For example,
take the fact that there's no mouse.
Web developers simply can't rely on
hover effects the way they once did
because hovering on an iPad just
isn't the same as hovering on an iMac.
But that's not to say that
iMacs haven't evolved as well.
This is Apple after all,
and we're constantly innovating here.
And our iMacs now have magic trackpads.
Trackpads, of course, are still mice,
but they have all of the
power of multi-touch gestures
built into them as well.
And with Lion, we've introduced evolved
software that really harnesses
the power of this new hardware.
There are innovations in here that
will affect the way we browse the
web and will impact our web content.
So today we're going to take a look
at Safari on Lion and Safari on iOS,
and we're going to peek under the
hood and look at how WebKit behaves
in these evolved environments.
And along the way,
we're going to give you some tips
and tricks for how you can bring
your web content into these new
environments as well and have them
really harness this new power.
So I mentioned WebKit briefly.
You've probably heard a lot
about WebKit already this week,
but in case you haven't,
WebKit is the engine that powers Safari.
It's open source,
and it's responsible for loading,
parsing, interpreting, rendering,
and managing web content in Safari.
Not just Safari, though.
WebKit's used a lot of places.
It's used in many of the core
applications on Mac OS X.
It's used on many more apps that
you'll find in the Mac App Store,
and it's used in tons of
apps in the iOS App Store.
WebKit is used in so many places
these days because of its flexibility
as a content rendering engine.
As we make Safari and WebKit a
better and better platform,
we really want to work together with you
as web developers so that we can deliver
an amazing experience to end users.
So in that vein, we're going to cover
three main topics today.
First, we'll dive into a few meaty issues
that really get to the heart of
getting that pixel perfection on iOS,
getting your layout just right.
Then we'll talk about the new
scrollbar redesign on Lion and
how it impacts web content.
And finally,
we'll talk about the new multi-touch
gestures on Lion and the gestures
that we've always had on iOS.
The topics that we're covering today
are things that just work and work
beautifully almost all the time,
probably 95% of the time or more.
But we're talking about them
anyway for two main reasons.
First of all,
sometimes you'll be in that 5% of the
time where you'll see your web content
interacting with these features in a way
that's not exactly how you want it to.
You'll hit some gotchas.
And we want to be able to help
you out of those situations.
We think we have a few easy tips
to get you out of those holes
that you might find yourself in.
And secondly,
sometimes you'll just want to craft a
really custom experience built for the
particular platform that you're on.
And in those situations,
we think you really need to understand
some of these underlying issues.
Then you can really use
the tools like a master.
So without further ado,
I would like to invite my colleague,
Vicki Murley, to the stage to talk to
you about Safari on iOS.
Thanks, Beth.
So, Safari on iOS.
You might be developing
a great Web application.
Facebook is one company
that delivers a native app,
but also gives you a great experience
when you visit their URL in Safari.
Or you might be a strictly native
application that is leveraging
Web technologies inside of UI WebView.
So, regardless of which
approach you're taking here,
you might end up in some scenarios
where the layout or behavior
or other things just aren't
quite exactly how you want them.
So I'm going to address
three of these areas today.
The first is undesirable results
for layout and behaviors.
Things just aren't quite right.
The second is pixelated
images on retina displays.
And finally, I'm going to talk about
fixed positioning.
Many of you have been trying
to get CSS fixed positioning
working in your web content.
You want that element to stay
on screen as you're scrolling,
and it hasn't been working for you.
So I'm going to address that topic today.
So let's start by talking
about these undesirable results
for layout and behaviors.
So what exactly do I mean
here when I say that?
Well,
as the Safari Technologies evangelist,
I get a lot of feedback
from people like you.
And some of the things
that I've heard are,
I have this empty space on
the sides of my web page,
or my web app doesn't fit the
screen the way I want it to.
Or maybe I've got it kind of fitting
the screen the way I want it to,
but I'm still seeing horizontal bounce,
and I want to get rid of that.
And also, you know,
double-tap and pinch gestures are
great for web pages viewed in Safari,
but I'm making a web app,
and I want to disable those behaviors.
So all of these problems or issues
that I just mentioned can be solved
by one key concept in Safari on iOS,
and that is the viewport.
So I'm going to spend a bit of
time today explaining the viewport,
how it works,
and how it relates to your content.
So in Safari on iOS,
we're looking at a web
page here in Safari.
The URL bar has been
scrolled out of view.
We have this first area,
and I'm just going to
call this the window.
It's not the DOM window.
I'm really just talking about this
as a fixed area that you're peering
through to look at the web content,
sort of like a portal on a ship.
Beth Dakin, Vicki Murley
In the same area, on the same line,
we also have what's called the viewport.
And when we first load the web page,
these two elements match each other.
They're almost one on top of each other,
matching.
So when users pinch to zoom to get
a closer look at some web content,
what happens is we still have
that window that we're using
to peer at the web content,
but our viewport changes scale.
The height and width
values remain the same.
It's really the scale
factor that changes.
So since the viewport has gotten bigger,
users can also pan the viewport right and
left to view different parts of the page.
And this also means that if Wikipedia was
using fixed positioning to position
its title and make it stick at the
top of the page when users scroll,
this element would be
off-screen at this point.
Because by definition,
elements that use fixed positioning use
the viewport as their containing block.
So that's the viewport on Safari on iOS.
On the desktop, again,
we have both of these elements.
We have the window,
and then we also have the viewport.
The difference here is how users
interact with the viewport.
Instead of scaling it,
users can actually change the
size of the viewport as they
resize a window in Safari.
As they make it bigger,
the content expands.
As they make it smaller,
Wikipedia has a flowable layout.
So some of these
elements are overlapping,
and scrollbars appear to
help us move right and left
to view more of the content.
So to recap, in Safari on iOS,
the viewport height and
width values don't change.
It's the scale factor that changes.
Users scale and pan to view
different parts of the page.
In Safari on the Desktop,
the viewport height and width
values are adjustable by the
user by resizing the window.
So, you know,
you might have noticed I'm not
using Lion screenshots here,
and that's because, you know,
this is what we were working with
when we invented Safari on iOS.
And one of the problems that we had to
solve was how do we go from this layout,
you know, existing web content designed
to fit into this model where you
can resize the viewport yourself,
to this,
where we want users to be able to scale,
pan, etc.
Well, the answer is actually
pretty straightforward.
What we do is we assume a width
of 980 pixels for the content,
and then we scale that down to
320 pixels in the case of iPhone.
So this means that our default viewport
settings have a width of 980 pixels and
a scale factor of 320 divided by 980,
which is about 0.32653,
and probably some extra
numbers there as well.
So this is why you sometimes see
this underutilized white space
on the edges of your content,
because we're assuming that you need 980
pixels to lay out all of your content.
Really, sometimes you don't
need all of that space.
So here, looking at the Wikipedia page,
we have some unused white
space on the right and left.
And then we also have this area at the
bottom with all the different languages
that I can switch between for Wikipedia.
The main content that I really
care about is in that central
area around that sphere.
So how can we tell Safari on
iOS that we only need,
we don't need 980 pixels,
we need a different amount of
pixels to layout our content?
Well,
the answer is through the viewport tag.
So here is what it looks like.
It's a meta tag.
The name is viewport, and you can set the
content value to a width.
And here I'm setting
the width equal to 540.
So I actually came up
with that value because I,
you know,
downloaded the Wikipedia site and kind
of eyeballed how much space I think was
needed to lay out that central area,
and it was about 540 pixels.
And just adding this one tag to the
Wikipedia page took me from something
that looked like this to this.
And, you know,
none of our content is lost.
We still have, you know,
if we scroll down,
we still have all those languages that
people might need to switch between.
But we're really focusing on the content.
We've told Safari on iOS that all we
need is 540 pixels to layout our content.
So we've seen what
setting the width means,
but the viewport is configurable
in other ways as well.
So besides setting the width,
you can set the height.
You can set the initial scale.
We talked about what the
default initial scale is,
but you can set that yourself as well.
And you can set these
things in combination.
So here I'm setting a width of 540,
a height of 800, and initial scale of 2.
So when you do something
like the last example here,
set multiple values within one
viewport tag for your page,
you should be aware that when you
set a single viewport parameter,
the others are inferred.
So for example,
if I set the width to 540,
the height and initial
scale are inferred.
You can get that fine-grained control
by setting multiple values altogether,
comma delimited.
For me, though,
it's hard to kind of imagine,
it's hard to mentally get your
head around what it might mean to
have a width of 540 and a height
of 800 and an initial scale of 2.
Like, off the top of my head,
I'm not sure what exactly that would
look like on that Wikipedia page.
So, a lot of the time,
I find myself just setting the width and
letting all the other values be inferred.
And that seems to work
really well for web content,
both for web apps, web pages,
and inside of UI WebView.
So you might have tried setting
the viewport tag already,
and you might run into this thing
where you get a little bit of
bounce to the right and left.
So basically,
that's a cue that your content doesn't
actually fit the screen exactly.
You might have something like this,
where you've set the
viewport width to 300 pixels,
then you have a div inside the
body that's also 300 pixels.
So you're thinking, OK,
these should match.
I shouldn't have any
extra horizontal space.
But the fact is that you do.
If you've ever opened up a simple
web page like this one in the
Web Inspector on the desktop,
you may have seen this field here,
User Agent Style Sheet.
So all web browsers have their own
style sheet that's part of the web
browser that defines the default styling
for HTML elements like the body tag.
So here, we see that the default styling
for Safari is a margin of 8 pixels.
So even though we have set our
width to 300 for both the viewport
and inside our main content,
we're actually getting an
extra 8 pixels on each side.
And that's why we're getting this
tiny bit of horizontal bounce to
the right and left in a web app.
This is really easy to fix.
You can just set the CSS style
for the margin to zero pixels,
and that will completely
solve your problem.
Okay.
So we've seen lots of ways to
customize the viewport for your layout,
but what about those behaviors
that we talked about,
double tapping and pinching to zoom?
You want your web app to fit
the screen and not be zoomable.
Well, the viewport tag comes
to the rescue again.
We can set a value user
scalable equal to no.
And that will disable all of the zooming,
double tapping to zoom, et cetera,
for your web app.
Two other parameters for the
viewport that are related to scaling,
you can set the minimum scale
and the maximum scale as well.
So, just to recap, you know,
there are several different ways to
configure the viewport related to both
how things layout and how things behave.
They have their own default values,
and they have minimum and
maximum values as well.
So that kind of covers
this class of problems,
undesirable results for
layout and behaviors.
Let's talk for a minute here next about
pixelated images on retina displays.
So the iPhone 4 Retina Display, you know,
it has sort of the same
dimensions as an older iPhone.
It's 320 pixels wide by 480 pixels tall.
Or you might say 320 units
wide by 480 pixels tall.
And on an older iPhone,
each of those units
corresponds to one pixel.
On an iPhone 4 Retina Display,
each of those units
corresponds to four pixels,
a two-by-two little box.
So that's how we get
the text super sharp.
This means that sometimes your
content can look a little grainy.
And there's a couple different
solutions that you can use to make
things look perfect in your web pages.
The first is for your graphics,
instead of using an image,
you could use a technology called SVG.
So it's a declarative API for
drawing and animating shapes,
lines, arcs, and more.
It's drawn by the web browser,
so it looks good even if users
zoom in to the maximum zoom level.
your content is still
going to remain sharp.
So with the advent of these new
devices that people are able to
zoom in on super close to the text,
a lot of people are adopting SVG for
content that they really care about.
So the New York Times is a great example.
They've chosen to draw
their logo with SVG.
So here's an actual screenshot of
zoomed in on the New York Times.
Other elements on the page
look a little bit grainy,
but the logo remains sharp,
even though I'm completely zoomed in.
Okay, so that's for graphics.
You could use SVG.
What about just plain old images?
Well, there's a couple different
solutions here as well.
So one is if you have just a simple
web app with a couple images,
something that you could do is, like,
we have this image.
It's 300 pixels by 450 pixels wide.
One approach you can take is to actually
create an image that's double the size.
So now we have an image that's
600 pixels by 900 pixels.
And then set the height and width of that
image to half of those dimensions in CSS.
So here, again,
we're going to be packing four
pixels into every unit instead
of just one pixel every unit.
You're probably familiar
already with CSS media queries.
They've been around for a long time to
do things like provide different layouts
if your web page is viewed on a screen
versus a printed version of your website.
So these are probably some media
queries that you're familiar with.
There are additional media queries
to measure or check the device width.
So here's a media query for
iPhone and one for iPad.
And media queries have a new value,
and that's device pixel ratio.
So if we wanted to look for
an iPhone 4 retina display,
we could use this expression
in our media query,
device pixel ratio.
There's variants of it, of course,
min device pixel ratio and
max device pixel ratio.
So in my second example
here of a media query,
I'm querying for a device that
is 320 pixels wide and has a
min device pixel ratio of 2,
because I want to load this image
for iPhone 4 retina displays and
any displays in the future that have
an even greater device pixel ratio.
So that's in your style sheet.
You know, you can load different
background images for different
devices and different displays,
but you can also evaluate a
CSS media query from JavaScript.
So we can check here for the
style media property and call the
match medium function on that,
and then we're just passing the
exact same CSS media query that we
saw before on the previous slide
that we had in our declarative CSS.
If that evaluates to true,
I can set the source of
my image to my retina,
my JPEG that I want to use
for the retina display,
and then I'm going to just append
that image to the document.
Or you could insert it anywhere, really.
Okay, so that solves kind of our
second class of problems,
pixelated images on retina displays.
Let's move on to this last one,
flaky fixed positioning.
So you've probably all seen different
websites that use CSS positioning.
Here's one.
It's united.com, booking,
travel via frequent flyer miles.
And the code that may show this bar at
the bottom of the screen as I scroll,
we're setting position to fixed
and bottom to zero pixels.
So on the desktop, as I scroll,
that bar is going to stay
at the bottom of the screen.
But if I have the same web page,
the same exact code on iPad, as I scroll,
the bar is going to scroll
along with the content.
And that is not exactly what I want.
There are a lot of JavaScript libraries
out there that are designed
to work around this problem.
Entire JavaScript libraries are
designed to help you keep an
element on screen as you scroll.
So we know it's something that people
have been really interested in.
While these libraries are great,
they have a shortcoming in that scroll
events are only emitted once a user
lifts their finger from the screen.
So as their finger is down and
they're moving to scroll up and down,
scroll events are not firing.
So they can really only move that
bar into place once the user has
lifted their finger from the screen.
So to show you how to make this work,
CSS fixed positioning in Safari on iOS,
I'm going to invite Beth Dakin
back up to the stage,
and we're going to do a quick demo.
All right.
So we have this website.
It was created last year
by one of our engineers,
Jing Jin,
for her awesome session on CSS last year.
It was pretty much
equally awesome this year.
So if you didn't go,
you should catch it on video.
But I have these elements.
I have this badge here.
I have this navigation bar at
the top and this sticky note.
And right now,
these are all using absolute positioning.
So as I scroll,
they're scrolling along with the page.
So I'm just going to go
ahead into my CSS file here,
and I'm going to change these
to use fixed positioning.
OK, so I've changed the
navigation bar at the top,
the sticky note, and the badge to all
use fixed positioning.
So I'm going to save that file.
Reload this page.
And now, when I scroll,
those elements are staying put.
They are not moving with
the rest of the content.
So Beth, will you show us what that
looks like on an iPad?
BETH DANKIN: Sure.
Let me reload the page here so I get
the latest and greatest version.
I'm going to scroll,
but I'm not getting any of the
fixed position awesomeness that
you just added to the desktop.
Oh, well, you know what?
I actually have another
iPad here to show you.
All right.
Let me just also reload the page to make
sure that I have the latest version.
And now I'm going to scroll.
How did you do that, Vicki?
How is your iPad different than my iPad?
Well, the iPads, you know,
they're pretty much exactly the same.
They're both iPad 2,
so they're both pretty awesome.
But this iPad has something
different about it,
and that is that it's
using Safari on iOS 5.0.
So, as you may have noticed,
if you've downloaded the seed already,
fixed positioning is now
working in Safari on iOS.
So, it definitely deserves applause.
So that looks great
when you're scrolling,
but what does it look
like when you zoom in?
That is a really good question, Beth.
You know,
we have these zoomable interfaces now.
How do we account for the fact that
people are going to want to zoom in?
What's going to happen to those elements?
Let me show you.
OK.
So I'm going to zoom in.
And as you can see,
the elements are growing in size
and they're also staying put.
So we have some Z-ordering so that the
badge is behind our content in the middle
here and the sticky is in front of that.
But as I pinch to zoom in,
they're getting bigger.
But then at some point,
Safari notices that if I had these
two things that are fixed on the
side and they kept just growing in
size and stayed put where they were,
then they would start overlapping.
So what we do is we start moving
those a little bit off of the page.
So if you watch this really closely,
like here on the badge, watch the H.
It's still on screen, still on screen.
Now we've reached a threshold.
We're Safari saying, OK,
it's getting too close.
These might start overlapping.
I'm going to start moving
things off the screen.
And that's basically what happens.
So they're still accessible
but not overlapping.
And we think that this is going to
be something that works great for
existing web content out there.
The web is big and
there's lots of content.
And any new content that
you guys might create.
So I hope you enjoy it because it
was pretty tricky to get going.
So about this CSS fixed
positioning that's new in iOS 5,
something, you know,
just watch for kind of
overlapping elements.
We had some Z ordering there,
so some of our elements were overlapping.
Our content in the middle
was semi-transparent,
so it didn't matter,
but test your content to make sure
that it works well with this new model.
So you might be saying to yourself,
oh my gosh, this is great.
I get to make that web app that
I always wanted with that element
fixed to the top or bottom,
and it's going to be super great.
Well, you could use that approach,
but there's a second approach
that I think might be even better
for that specific use case,
a web app that fits the screen and has a
menu fixed to either the top or bottom.
And that is to use an
overflow scroll area.
So the code for doing that
might look something like this.
I have a header.
It's 320 pixels wide.
I made it 56 pixels tall.
I gave it a background color.
And then I have my content.
And that's got the overflow
style set to scroll.
And that has a height of 300 pixels.
Then in my HTML,
I'm just going to order those
elements one after another.
The heading that I want fixed to
the top of the screen followed
by the content below it.
So you might be saying to yourself,
overflow scroll.
You've got to be kidding me.
That content is only going to
be scrollable with two fingers.
It takes a two-finger gesture to
scroll content in Safari on iOS.
Well,
I'm happy to tell you that in iOS 5,
overflow scroll areas are no
longer going to require two
fingers to scroll the content.
So...
One might say that we've given one
finger to two-finger scrolling.
In the scene that you have,
it's looking pretty good,
but we're going to be continuing to
improve it in other ways as we get
closer and closer to shipping iOS 5.
So please watch the release notes for
more information about this feature.
You know, as we continue to improve this,
there's something that makes this a
really attractive thing if you're trying
to make a really great-looking web app,
and that is the scrollbar behavior.
So if you keep your eye on this area,
if I were just using an
element with fixed positioning,
the scrollbar would show up
at the top and then overlap,
you know, my heading at the top.
If I'm using an overflow scroll area,
then the scrollbar behavior is
much more like I would expect.
It's only showing up
in the scrollable area.
And that's going to be what you want if
you're creating an app like this one.
So,
thanks to the Safari engineering team,
we solved that final problem,
flaky fixed positioning.
And that covers all three areas
that I wanted to discuss with
you today in Safari on iOS.
So I'm going to hand it back
to Beth to talk about Lion.
Thanks, Vicki.
Let's move on to Lion.
I want to cover a few topics
today with regard to the new
scrollbar design on Lion.
First, I want to give you an overview
of the new scrollbar design.
I'm sure you've--well,
I know you've all seen it because
it was talked about in the keynote,
and I'm sure some of
you have installed Lion,
and maybe you went to other
sessions that discussed it,
but I want to make sure
we're all on the same page,
so I'm going to give you
an overview of the design.
Then we're going to talk about how
that design affects web content.
I want to tell you a particular
part of the implementation about
our color heuristic to give you a
little idea of what's going on there.
And finally, we'll talk about scrolling.
So let's begin with the new design.
The theme of Lion is back to the Mac.
So Mac OS X has been inspired by iOS,
just like iOS originally inspired-- wait,
I said that wrong.
iOS has inspired Mac OS X,
just like Mac OS X originally
inspired iOS.
And as I mentioned earlier,
we now have these great
Magic Trackpads on our Macs.
So we have multi-touch gestures
available to us everywhere.
It's really a natural progression
for Lion to change the way it
indicates interaction to the user
with regard to scrollbar and scrolling
in this new multi-touch world.
The new Lion scrollbars really
have that look and feel of iOS,
and it really makes sense in a
world where you interact with
your computer with gestures.
So before we take a
look at the new design,
let's remind ourselves of what
scrollbars look like on Snow Leopard.
So this is what they look
like on Snow Leopard.
Probably the two most obvious features
of this scrollbar is the big blue
scroll thumb and the fact that this is
a scrollbar that's always visible and
always taking up space on the page.
Now, Lion actually introduces
two new scrollbar designs.
There's a legacy style that's actually
very similar to the Snow Leopard look.
So we'll look at that one first.
It looks like this.
There is a bit of a redesign here.
Instead of that big blue scroll thumb,
we have a more slender gray scroll thumb.
But otherwise, this behaves just like the
Snow Leopard scroll bar.
So this is a scroll bar
that's always visible,
and it's always taking
up space on the page.
And just so you know,
users who have Lion on a machine
that does not have a multi-touch
input device hooked up to it,
their system will default to using
this legacy style of scroll bars.
But it is able to be controlled
manually in system preferences.
So the new, new design, of course,
is the overlay scroll bar.
Overlay scroll bars just
sit on top of content.
They take up zero pixels
of additional space.
And of course, most of the time,
they are not visible.
So that's a big part of the new design,
is the fact that they're not
visible a lot of the time.
And so I want to explain to you when
you should expect them to be visible.
Because that's a big part of
understanding its behavior.
But also, there's actually a bug in
the developer seed you have.
So I want you to know how to expect
these to behave in the future.
So first of all,
when a web page finishes loading,
the scroll bars will flash to indicate
that there is content to scroll to.
Then if the window is
ordered out for any reason,
when it becomes the
frontmost window again,
the scrollbars will flash then as well.
The scroll bars are always
visible when scrolling a page,
but just hovering in the scroll bar
region will not cause them to appear.
However,
clicking in the scroll bar region
does cause the page to scroll,
so that's important to know
for hit testing purposes,
that little scroll bar region,
even when there's no scroll
bar visible whatsoever,
it's still swallowing clicks.
So if you happen to be on a website
where there is a link or something
right against the edge of the web page,
if you tried to click the link
in that little narrow 10-pixel
area that's the scroll bar region,
you wouldn't click the link,
you would click the scroll bar region.
So that's one thing to note.
And finally, if you happen to hover over
in the scrollbar region when
the scrollbar is showing,
you'll see this additional
little track-like thing.
It's really hard to see on
this particular recording,
so we'll take a closer
look on the next slide.
Here's a closer look at
the scrollbars in general.
On the left here,
we have a snow leopard scrollbar,
and on the right,
we have the new overlay scrollbars.
Of course,
the big blue scroll thumb is now
this slender gray knob thing.
Also note the controls at the bottom
that we always had on Snow Leopard,
these arrows in the resize corner.
Those aren't there in the new
Lion legacy design either,
so controls are officially
a thing of the past.
Then we have this track on Snow Leopard,
and we have this only rarely visible
track with the new overlay scrollbars.
Again, you only end up seeing that when
you hover over a scrollbar when
it happens to already be showing,
then a track will also appear.
Okay, so hopefully we're all on the
same page now in how we expect the
new overlay scrollbars to behave.
So let's talk about how
they affect web content.
So I also took Jingjin's
awesome demo from last year and
adapted it to my amazing blog.
I've added an overflow
scroll div in the middle,
which brings us to my first point,
which is that all scrollable
areas honor the design.
You'll see that my overflow scroll
div has an overlay scrollbar
just like my main document does.
And if I had legacy scrollbars,
they would both have legacy scrollbars.
So everything will be the same there.
Of course, most of the time,
they'll look like this.
So you may have noted that I said
this was an overflow scroll div.
So this may look a little bit
different than you might expect an
overflow scroll div to look because
there are no empty scrollbar tracks.
So to give you a visual
of exactly what I mean,
this is what the same page looks
like with legacy scrollbars.
You'll see that even though there's
no content to scroll to horizontally
in that overflow scroll div,
there's still an empty
horizontal scrollbar track.
And that's just part of what overflow
scroll means on Snow Leopard and on
any platform really that has this
track look of a default scrollbar.
And just to really emphasize that,
if there was actually
no content in this div,
you would still have
empty scrollbar tracks.
But not in an overlay world.
In an overlay world,
there are no empty scrollbar tracks.
That track-like thing that shows up
sometimes when you happen to hover over
the scroll thumb when it's showing,
it's just too much of
a different paradigm.
It doesn't apply here,
so it doesn't make sense to show that
for overflow scroll in an overlay world.
[Transcript missing]
So you really just see more.
You have 15 more visual pixels.
Most DOM metrics remain the
same despite this difference.
Things like offset width, scroll width.
These things never really
factored in scrollbars.
They're about the outer
limits of the element.
They're the same.
However, some are different.
Client width, for instance,
is defined as a measurement that
subtracts out the width of the scrollbar.
And if the width of a scrollbar is
15 pixels or if it's zero pixels,
you'll end up getting a
different number there.
So that's something to look out for.
Really, you should just test your
content in both of these worlds,
in the overlay world
and the legacy world.
And you should make sure
you like what you see.
I can say,
having been browsing the web for
months now with overlay scrollbars,
that I don't expect existing content
to really change with these changes.
I haven't seen any of these
things appearing as gotchas.
I've seen one instance of it, actually.
But it's something to be aware of,
that you can't expect scrollbars to
be the same size on every platform,
and that some DOM metrics take
that into account and some don't.
Just something to think about.
Okay,
so hopefully that gives you an idea of
how the new design affects web content.
There are a few other things.
One I'll mention just briefly is that
if you happen to do any amount of
custom CSS styling to your scrollbars,
they'll look exactly the same on
Lion as they would on Leopard.
They'll default to that legacy style
look where they'll always be there
and they're always taking up space,
and they'll look the
same way you styled them.
So that won't be affected,
just so you know.
So let's talk about the color heuristic.
I've shown you lots of
pictures of scrollbars today.
I'm sure you've seen
them a lot this week.
They usually look like this,
this gray scroll thumb.
However,
on a page with a darker background,
you'll see a scroll thumb
that looks like this.
It's a lighter color.
So what we're doing in WebKit is
we're trying to assess the background
color of -- or the background of
the window that you're viewing,
and we're trying to decide if we
think it's a light or dark background.
And then we decide which scroll
bar thumb to use based on whether
it's a light or dark background.
So I want to explain to you our current
heuristic for assessing whether a
page has a light or dark background.
Basically, we take relevant colors and we
composite them together using the
Porter-Duff source over equation.
And what we decide are the relevant
colors as of now are the background
color of the HTML element,
the background color of the body element,
and the base background color.
The base background color
is really just white.
It's the color of the window.
But this is relevant in cases where
the background color of the HTML or
body element has some alpha in it,
in which case that white blends through.
So all of those colors
are blended together,
and then the result is
converted to an HSL value,
and that L gives us the lightness.
If it's a light background,
we'll use a dark scroll knob
that shows up really well.
If it's a dark background,
we'll use a light scroll knob
that also shows up really well.
So a few things to note about the
heuristic as it's currently implemented
is that background images are ignored.
So if you have a really dark
background image covering your
page and no background color set,
then you might run into a situation
where you're not seeing the scrollbar
thumb that you expect to see.
However,
that's a really easy fix because you can
just set a dark background color that's
similar to your dark background image,
and you'll never see the color,
but it will be picked
up in this heuristic,
and the correct scroll
thumb will be chosen.
And all other elements
are ignored as well.
So just to give you an idea of that,
if I take this example that I used
earlier and I take a giant white div
and I position it over my content,
I'm not really going to get
something that's exactly what
I'm looking for or super useful.
So a few things to note here is that
the scrollbar can be one of two colors.
And you should make sure
you like what you see.
You should test this out.
And if you think the heuristic
isn't working for you and
you can't work around it,
you should file bugs,
bugs.webkit.org or bugreporter.apple.com.
So hopefully that gives you an idea
of what you can expect in terms
of different scrollbar colors.
Finally, let's talk about scrolling.
So there's some elasticity
in scrolling on Lion.
We call this rubber banding sometimes.
During a rubber band
scroll on Lion in Safari,
scroll events continue to fire.
So the on-scroll event,
on-mouse wheel event,
they will continue to fire while the
rubber band is actually happening.
The scroll offset can be negative
if you're at the top of the
page and you're pulling it down
to see the linen behind it.
At that time, the scroll offset of the
body will be negative.
It can also be greater than you
expect if you're doing the same
effect at the bottom of the page.
And another thing to note
is this is different on iOS.
As Vicki mentioned earlier,
scroll events on iOS fire when you
lift your finger from the screen.
On iOS, you're really not scrolling.
You're panning around.
It's really a different paradigm.
So this is just something that's
different between the two platforms.
And that's an overview of scrollbars
and scrolling and how you should
expect them to affect your web content.
So let's move on to fluid gestures.
As you saw in the keynote on Monday,
we support some really cool new
fluid gestures in Safari on Lion.
We have a double-tap, a pinch-to-zoom,
and a pretty sleek
back-forward swipe navigation.
So with regards to those new gestures,
today I want to talk to you
about how you can optimize your
web content for double-tap.
Of course, this is extremely
relevant to iOS as well.
And then we're going to talk about how
you can ensure back-forward performance,
which is,
it's really great when you have a page
that loads quickly back-forward when
you're using the swipe navigation.
Beth Dakin, Vicki Murley
I'll begin with double-tap.
So to explain the best ways to structure
your web content for double-tap,
I want to explain to you
the double-tap algorithm.
It's the same algorithm on Lion and iOS.
So this is the same algorithm that
you've been using already for years.
It begins by finding the tapped element.
So let's say I tapped on the beginning
of this text in this article.
And then it finds the first block
or image ancestor of that element.
So in this case, I tapped on some text,
so it will find a block ancestor.
And it will probably be like a div
that the text is being laid out in,
or a P element, something like that.
In the case of a block,
which is what we have here
where I've tapped on the text,
the block will be zoomed
to fit width-wise.
So it will look something like this.
If I instead tapped on this image
at the beginning of this article,
the image would be zoomed to fit.
So the distinction here
is that with an image,
you make sure you see the full image.
The height and the width will
both be taken into account.
If it's just a block,
we won't take the height
of the block into account.
And another thing to note is
that there is a maximum scale
factor on both platforms,
and it's different.
We find that what starts to seem
ridiculous as you keep zooming
in more is somewhat related
to the size of your screen.
So there is a slightly
different maximum scale factor.
Double-tap is definitely an example
of something that just works
the vast majority of the time.
But there are some things that you can
keep in mind if you really want your
site to work well with double-tap.
First is to avoid wide blocks of text.
Something like this,
if you double-tap on it,
it doesn't change much.
It's not really doing anything
interesting for the feature.
But if your page is organized
into digestible little sections,
then there's lots of opportunity
for double-tapping to be a really
interesting user experience.
Okay, so moving on,
let's talk about ensuring
back-forward performance.
Back-forward performance is
really important everywhere.
It's always been an important issue.
As I mentioned earlier,
it's relevant today because we
have this new back-forward swipe
navigation in Safari on Lion,
and it really does have the best
experience when going back is quick.
But going back and forward being
fast has always been really,
really important on iOS.
If you're on a really slow network,
it can be a total drag to go back
and have to wait 30 seconds for
a page to load all over again.
It's really a relevant issue on
all platforms and all browsers,
so getting good back-forward
performance is a great goal everywhere.
The key to back-forward
performance is making sure your
page gets into the page cache.
So a lot of times when
people hear caching,
they think caching resources
or an HTTP cache or storing
these things on disk.
But that's really not
what I'm talking about.
I'm talking about the page cache.
So normally,
when you navigate away from a page,
it's just totally torn down.
The whole DOM tree is destroyed.
JavaScript objects are collected.
It's just gone.
But the whole point of the
page cache is to not do that.
It's to actually keep
those things around,
keep around the whole DOM,
keep around all of your
JavaScript objects.
When you go back to a page
that's stored in the page cache,
it's practically instantaneous.
You can kind of think of it as if
when you're normally viewing a page,
you have a play button going,
and when that page goes
into the page cache,
you've just hit pause.
Going back to a page where
you've just hit pause,
you just hit play again, it just works.
So the key to getting your
page in the page cache is
not to do something special.
It's to not do a few things.
You just want to avoid
things that are uncacheable.
So let's talk about what's uncacheable.
First of all, unfortunately,
HTTPS is uncacheable
for security reasons.
There's not much way to work around this.
It's just not safe to
keep around the DOM or
JavaScript objects of an HTTPS site.
And if you are creating an HTTPS site,
it's probably because
it has to be that way.
It has to be secure.
So unfortunately, there's not much of a
way around this one.
Plugins are also not cacheable.
Plugins run native code in the browser,
and there is no trivial way
to say to that native code,
stop, and don't do anything bad
for the next few minutes.
So unfortunately,
you have to try to avoid plugins if
you want to get into the page cache.
But I think that there have been
a lot of sessions this week that
have given really great ideas for
how to avoid plugins on your sites,
such as the HTML5 video session
that happened earlier and the
great CSS effects session.
So hopefully, you'll get some ideas of
how to avoid using plugins.
The next thing that's a really,
really big one is unload event handlers.
Unload event handlers were designed
as a way to allow a web developer to
do some page teardown at the end of,
when you're navigating
away from the page.
So it's sort of in the API contract
that a website author is allowed
to totally destroy the page
in the unload event handler.
And therefore,
it's just completely unsafe to cache a
page that uses an unload event handler.
There are no browsers, many browsers,
have a concept of a page cache.
For example, Firefox calls theirs
the back-forward cache.
And they, and we, no browser,
caches pages that use
unload event handlers.
Except, actually, new in iOS 5,
in an effort to make
back as fast as possible,
Mobile Safari now ignores unload
event handlers on pages that can
otherwise be put in the page cache.
So there is an exception there.
But if you really feel like there's
critical work that you need to
do in an unload event handler,
I strongly encourage you to change,
make a simple change,
instead of using unload and load,
to use page show and page hide.
Page show and page hide, first of all,
will run on Mobile Safari.
So if you feel like you really
need to do some work when
you're unloading your web page,
use these.
But also, they're totally cacheable.
The thing that makes
these cacheable is that,
actually, the load event fires at
the single discrete moment
when a web page is loaded.
Page show fires at exactly the same
time but it also fires when it's
being restored from the page cache.
So any work that was undone in page
hide can be redone in page show.
I strongly encourage you to use these
instead of load and unload as they are
extremely cache-friendly and they're
also implemented on all major browsers.
So that's sort of just the tip of
the iceberg of a really big topic
in terms of website performance,
but it's a really easy way to get
pretty awesome back-forward performance.
So we've talked about
a lot of things today.
I think one of the big messages here is
that most things will look great as is.
We told you about a lot
of browser features today,
and most of them are
things that just work.
However, customizations and improvements
are available when you need
them or when you want them.
We work really hard here at Apple to make
existing content work better and better,
and you probably saw that with the
new fixed positioning in iOS 5.
But sometimes you will
need to adjust to things,
and sometimes you'll just want to
make something better and better
because it's all about the user and
delivering an amazing user experience.
And finally,
you should just test your content.
This is especially
applicable to the scrollbars.
Just looking at overlay
scrollbars and legacy scrollbars
will make a big difference.
If you have any more questions,
you can always contact
the fabulous Vicki Murley,
the same Vicki Murley that was on
this very stage a few minutes ago.
All of the relevant
sessions already happened,
but I encourage you to look at the
videos if you didn't get to attend them.
The whole internet and web track really
is somewhat relevant to this topic,
so I encourage you to look
at all of the sessions,
really.